All right, we've got, um, Kate Grimwood and Cath Cronin.
Welcome. Very good
to have you joining Health committee today.
We've got you in here for 10 minutes to talk about, um,
the situation at Whakatane Hospital.
I will hand it over to you, um,
but also if you are able to leave us a couple of minutes
for questions at the end, that'd be greatly appreciated too.
Thank you. Thank you. I'll Cap Cronin here.
I'm the region regional executive director for teta.
So we've started this, this work
and by the end of December, January last year,
we were in a position where we had, um,
lost five SMOs to the obstetric
and gynecology service in Whakatane.
So it means we had to, um, change our care
to a primary birthing service
and set up a system where women transferred to Ong Hospital
for obstetric care.
So we've been working over the last eight to nine months
to restore secondary services to Whakatane.
It's been a prime focus for us
and definitely on our agenda to resume those services.
So we are in a position now,
and I, I'll hand over to Kate to talk a little bit through
the recruitment and how that's been going.
But not only looking at a gynecology with the SMOs,
but also strengthening our midwifery service.
Working very closely with the community
to make sure we've got that integrated start to stop of
that whole pathway For women.
Our focus has been a lot on obstetrics.
'cause obviously a lot of the clinical risk was
around those women and the babies,
but we are also restoring our secondary gynecology services,
which is a very important part, especially
for the woman in Papa and right down the East Coast phase.
So that's a little bit of an overview,
but I'll hand over to Kate.
'cause I think the questions that we received were
predominantly around our SMO recruitment, um,
where I'm the Chief Medical Officer
for HAR at to Bay of Plenty.
So, um, I'll talk, um, a bit about the SMO side
and then, um, a little bit about
the other learnings perhaps.
Um, so we have been successful in recruiting four SMOs
and we've got a fifth who we're just waiting
to see if she's gonna sign a contract.
And we're very hopeful that that will happen this week.
One of those is already on board.
He's been in, um, Targa for some months, as required
by the medical council to start his practice,
but is now successfully moving over to Whakatane.
He does two days a week now at Whakatane
and when that will step up with time.
Um, and alongside that,
the Todd Onga SMOs have been coming over
and doing work in Whakatane.
So we've already been able to reestablish some day surgery
for a lot of outpatient sessions.
Antenatal care over in Whakatane,
although we can't establish full services again, our second,
um, SMO, uh,
should be arriving within the next couple of weeks.
He's just waiting for his immigration
clearance to come into the country.
He's a very experienced, um,
south African obstetrician and gynecologist.
Um, and I think we'll have, um,
a very good leadership qualities we'll bring to the service.
'cause We wanna reestablish a, a leader on site at Whakatane
to make sure they have a very clear voice
for ONG and Whakatane.
Um, he again, will do a little bit of time at Targa, but
because we've already got one person in place,
we can transition him over to Whakatane a little bit sooner.
Um, so he'll probably spend the first four weeks
or so just to settle into the New Zealand system
and understand what that's about before we move him over.
And the Targa visits will continue.
So we, we are doing, um,
about 50 sessions a month now in Whakatane
and managing to get through a lot of work there.
The next two SMOs both come at the beginning of January,
so they're both from the states, um,
and they are already, um, basically well set up to come now.
So we are pretty confident about their arrival.
You can never be absolutely sure when you've got quite a lot
of, um, balls in the ring, as it were.
So, um, but they've been over, they've had lots
of conversation with local community
and then that's been a really big learning from bringing
people in with the, uh, plan for them
to stay long term has been about settling them in the
community and, and how we, how we bring them in.
So when they come, they'll only need a very short period
of con, may even just just be as assured as a week, um,
because there will be much more wraparound staff
at Whakatane by then.
And then the, um, the fifth we hope to bring in, um, sort
of, uh, February, march time if everything
works out in that respect.
So we'll go back to a full compliment.
Um, the, um, relationships with
PGA are much more established though now.
We have a new, um, leader for that service, medical leader
for that service who's been incredible in this space,
both recruiting, but establishing,
also establishing those relationships.
We have a new, um, chief midwife for the whole bay
and a new midwifery leader for Whakatane itself.
So we feel that we are going in with really, um,
a much more robust group of staff.
We've done a large amount of work, um, talking
with those on the ground in Whakatane,
but also people who've been in Whakatane and have moved on.
Um, and as well as large amounts of community engagement,
um, holding forums across the Eastern Bay to understand
and what the, um, priorities of the community are.
So we're taking those learnings away.
We're also working with Laura, Ian
and we rural generalism, um, space
to look at rural generalist obstetricians
and the model they use in the West coast
to support our obstetric service once it's up and running
and ensure sustainability.
Happy to take any further questions,
whichever way you wanna.
Thank you, Kate and Kathy, it sounds like there's been a
remarkable improvement, um, in this, in this situation.
I've got questions from Isha and Hamish and Kim as well. Uh,
Thank you both for your availability
for the committee, and thank you, Mr.
Chair. If, uh, you don't mind, I just have, um, a number
of questions that just require, uh, short answers.
Please. Uh, are you aware of difficulties
with the ambulance service impacting the ability for women
to transfer to TGA for care during labor?
No, I think we've got, we've got good
communication with, with St.
John's and we've set up systems, uh,
ambulance based at Whakatane for transfer,
but also all our usual emergency transfer options,
including helicopters when we need them.
So there's not been cases of people missing out on timely
care during labor because of the lack of availability
of ambulances to your knowledge.
Thank you. Thank, uh,
what about the termination of pregnancy?
I'll share it around given we have limited time.
Please come through the chair please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, what services are available
for termination of pregnancy, uh, in Whakatane now,
and how does that compare to, say, two years prior?
Um, so, um, there have been, um,
services available in Whakatane
for early pregnancy throughout,
but there have always been a need to move from Whakatane
to ONG by later, um, terminations and,
and indeed, um, there's still a need
to move outta the region for very late terminations
that need to go to specialist centers,
but there will be a way with the new SMOs
to reestablish a better service than we had previously
because we have got SMOs
coming with an interest in that area.
Thank you. One more and then I'll come over to,
And, uh, how many, um,
I understand Whakatane, uh, the CMO is in Alga
and recruitment is done regionally, or,
or sorry, um, approval
to recruit is given regionally or nationally.
How many positions in Whakatane Hospital
for senior medical officers are budgeted
but not approved for recruitment?
Yeah, so that, that all the recruitment is done, um,
at the district level with in close, you know,
with Whakatane in, involved in that decision making.
So there aren't any SMO positions across
that aren't approved
and that we're not trying to recruit to.
I've got a question that I wanna ask.
I go over to Cam and I,
you talked a lot about community engagement.
I hear locally there has been a significant increase in
that, especially since you came around, uh, Kath.
So thank you for that. Um,
there was a meeting last night in around this.
Are you able to give a,
what were the key takeaways from that?
Look, I think the key takeaway was, you know, I presented
with the team and we, we sort of took the, um, members
of the community that came through the work
that we've done in the last nine months.
So the turnaround and, and the, the positive feedback.
We got acknowledgement from the community all stepping up
to tell us that they were, that they were very impressed
with the work, that we were sort
of being very transparent in what we were sharing.
They were resuming, I think, a trusting relationship
with us, that we were doing what we said we would do.
And so there, we'll just keep them in close contact now
as we head towards March, April.
But we've got, you know, strong offers
and engagement already with some of those community members
who will be involved and with us sort of going forward.
So I think it was a very positive meeting.
You know, we, we were there for probably over an hour
or so talking with, with a very engaged group,
and it was, um, really positive.
Thank you. I'll come to, to cam. Yeah.
Thank you j uh, my questions about
a couple of things you raised there.
So, to Manawa, Taki area, um, sharing services has,
has this impacted on, um,
how's this impacted on the wider region, like,
uh, uh, as well?
And then on top of that, the,
the question about the medical council requirement for, um,
obstetrics to be in toga first.
Could you explain why that is?
Yeah, no problem. Um,
so the first question about regional impact, um,
from obstetrics and gynecologist perspective,
there's actually been fairly minimal regional impact.
We spoke to our colleagues at
and lakes, whereas as we went into this
and had their agreement that when necessary they could help.
But actually we've not needed to, to draw on that greatly.
The biggest impact obviously has been felt in Taronga
where most women have gone to.
Um, but we are looking forward to, with the new staff,
being able to relieve that pressure there and do more
and more in, in Whakatane.
So not a great deal.
We are more generally looking at regionalization of services
and how we do share load across the region, though outside
of Gyne, 'cause there are lots of other pinch points,
obviously, that we'd like to work together.
And, um, from the point of view
of the medical council question, um,
when someone first arrives, they need
to have quite close working relationship
with someone who's a fellow in that specialty
that they're coming into with no
people on the ground at all.
In Whakatane, that was impossible to start off with.
So the initial person had to spend a fair bit
of time working closely,
and then that individual's gone with them to whakatane
that supervisor to make, to ensure that practice is, is
as is needed, but with the arrival of subsequent ones,
and they're being more people on the ground in Whakatane,
that time can be minimized and can be done much shorter.
Medical council's worked really closely with us and,
and we've had a very good relationship with them so
that we've minimized as much as possible.
But even aside from the medical council requirements,
it would be really quite with high risk
to have an individual working on their own in whakatane
with no other support there.
So it, it really did make a lot
of sense from the clinical risk point of view, as well as,
um, the safety for someone who's come from a very different
house setting to our own.
Thank you. Thank you very much.
Um, we've gone over time,
but, um, uh, well on Kath, it's been a,
a notable improvement is what I've heard on the ground.
And thank you for presenting to the committee as well today
and for being available.
Thank you very much for your transparency
as well. We really appreciate
It. Thank you. Thank,
thank you all. Goodnight.
Uh, welcome Health New Zealand.
We have you here to, sorry, ministry
and to offended on that welcome Ministry of Health.
Uh, we've got you here on the petition
of fluoride free New Zealand to stop water fluoridation.
We have you in here for a 10 minute hearing.
Uh, I'll hand that time over to you shortly,
but if you want to leave us time
for some questions at the end,
I'm sure members appreciate that opportunity.
But, um, over to you. Welcome,
Uh, K Koto, um, called Dr. Richard Jane, uh, ho.
I am Deputy Director
of Public Health at the, uh, ministry of Health.
Um, we have, um, online, uh, it's Dr. Rianna Clark.
Um, I, uh, first of all, like to, um,
discuss a little bit about the
burden of rural health in New Zealand.
Uh, New Zealand has high rates of preventable tooth decay,
um, particularly for our Maori and Pacific children
and those living in deprived communities.
Um, in the last year, there were over 10,000 children
hospitalized for dental, um, treatment of which we, um,
estimate 90% or over 90% were considered preventable.
Of these preventable dental events, 62% were
for children aged five to nine years.
41% were Maori
and 14% of Pacific children, along
with the health burden is also an economic burden of, um,
for oral health in New Zealand.
And action station, uh, study last year, um,
showed that the economic burden
of poor on health is estimated to be
around 6.2 billion a year for New Zealand.
This includes, uh,
over a hundred million dollars per year in health system
costs, uh, 2.5 billion in lost productivity
and $3.1 billion in reduced quality of life.
A 2015 PRA report also estimated
that if community water fluoridation was extended
to water supplies that were not fluoridated,
this would have the potential
to result in an estimated net savings
of more than $600 million under 20 years.
Much Immunity water fluoridation. So what is that?
Um, it's the process
of adjusting the natural occurring level
of fluoride in the water supply to between 0.7
and one milligram per liter.
Just for context, uh, New Zealand, um,
fluoride occurs naturally in New Zealand water,
but only at about 0.2, um, milligrams per liter,
which is too low to be beneficial to oral health.
Currently, almost 60%
of the New Zealand population has access
to fluoride related drinking water
and the water regulator to
monitors fluoride water in the water supplies
to ensure it does not supply the maximum acceptable value
of 1.5 milligrams per liter.
Community water fluoridation is the, uh, the role, the role
of fluoride and mold has been examined around the world,
including the New Zealand over the last 60 years.
Studies show that children
and adults living in areas
with community water fluoridation have significantly less
tooth decay and people living in areas without
community water fluoridation is endorsed
by the World Health Organization
and other international authorities as one
of the most effective public health measures
for the prevention of dental decay.
The 2015 review of the benefits
and costs of community water fluoridation in New Zealand
estimated that there would've been benefits.
There's benefits to water audation including a 40% lower
lifetime incidence of tooth decay
among children and adolescents.
48% reduction in hospital admissions
for tooth decay treatment among children aged zero
to four years, a 21% reduction in tooth decay
amongst adults, aged 18 to 44,
and a 30% reduction in tooth decay
amongst adults aged over 45
Oral health interventions.
It's, it's important to have a suite of measures
that they're the most effective
and the most ProE equity in New Zealand.
We have a, a community water fluoridation as part of a suite
of measures that supports oral health,
including free dental services for under eighteens,
providing free toothbrushes
and toothpaste for families with free schoolers
and healthy eating support.
Going back to the, uh, free toothbrushes
and toothpaste, uh, we that this was started in 2021
and while, um, at that time, uh, 40%, about 40% of zero
to four year olds had improved, had, um,
regular toothbrushing
and studies show that, um, recently it's up to 60%,
which is excellent because that shows that
that intervention is working to some degree.
But it also shows that there's a large portion of people
that are zero to four year olds that are not achieving this.
Hence, the support of a suite of measures,
including community water fluoridation,
Community water fluoridation is safe.
There have been four, um, New Zealand reviews of ev
of the evidence since 2014.
Two from the Prime Minister's chief science advisors in 20,
uh, 14 and 2021,
which showed water fluoridation at the levels used in
New Zealand posed no significant health risk in 2024.
Just last year, the ministry provi, um,
produce another evidence review that supported
that conclusion showing the ongoing benefits
of community water flu relation and that it provides equity.
The Ministry of Health then completed an additional review
with some new evidence that had come to light recently,
and that showed no change
to the conclusions that were born above.
The ministry continues to review new evidence
and research as it comes to life.
So our final conclusion is really fairly simple.
The safety and effectiveness of community water fluoridation
as a public health measure has been consistently
demonstrated across multiple studies
of different designs by many years.
Kilda questions. Great. Thank you.
Members have questions? Jenny?
Uh, thank you very much. Um, you, in one of your slides,
the burden of poor oral health.
Uh, you mentioned in your second point, um, particularly
Maori Pacific children, those living in
deprived communities.
Um, where are those deprived communities?
Uh, Rihanna, can you hear, did you hear that question?
I wonder if you could feel that.
Yeah, so, um, we have a number. Yeah. Good. Fantastic.
Um, so there's a number of places around the MOTU
that have poor oral health outcomes.
Um, for example, one of the worst places in the country
for oral health outcomes is up at Ro up Northland Way.
So, um, so, so
Where specifically Kiri kiri,
Um, there are basically the whole
of Northland has poor oral health.
And so that's why we have looked at, um,
particularly picking areas with the 14 where we, uh,
gave directions back in July, 2022.
We particularly picked areas
that needed water fluoridation the most, uh, for a variety
of reasons we picked those 14.
One was because of having the worst oral health.
One was to get a, a spread across the country.
Um, and another was
because the councils were ready to operate the, um,
fluoridation capital works with us.
So how many of those, um, areas in the north
as you've highlighted, would those children
kaki Maori be on water tanks and not on a town supply?
Yeah, well, that's one of the issues.
Um, if we did, for example, if the director,
director general were to instruct all, um, local authorities
to put fluoride in water where the population was 500
or more, we could get to about 85%
of the population in New Zealand,
but there will always be about 15%
or so that would be on tanks
or similar so that, um, we would have
to look at alternative measures for those populations.
Agreed.
And is, is a big part of solving
the tooth decay challenges fluidization?
Or is there a larger piece there around
brushing your kids' teeth and also, uh, making sure
that your children aren't consuming vast quantities
of sugary food and drink? Mm-hmm.
Well, as Richard says, um, it's actually, you know,
the whole lot of that together, it's a, a suite of measures.
Um, but we know that with water fluoridation, um,
it is known to be the best way to prevent decay.
And the really good thing about it is that nobody needs
to make a behavior change.
So, for example, the fanau who can't afford healthy food,
or the fanau who can't afford toothbrushes
and toothpaste, you know, they don't have to change
and start brushing twice a day
with toothpaste they can't afford
because water fluoridation will help them with that.
So it is a very equitable way
of improving oral health without requiring people
to make a behavior change.
Okay. Supplementary on that. Supplementary.
So, so, so you are saying water, fluoridated water, um,
rather than encouraging behavior change is the preference
from of the ministry
And as we've said, it's a suite.
It's the whole lot. So, um, Richard pointed out
that we have been giving out free toothbrushes
and toothpaste to preschoolers
and their whole household, so not just the
preschoolers, but the whole family.
And we've seen an improvement in brushing, for example,
in zero to fours.
We also have, um, various, uh, initiatives
around the country, um,
where there's toothbrushing going on in schools.
You, um, the local districts, health New Zealand districts,
um, are involved in that.
And we also have some healthy eating programs, uh,
like healthy active learning
and so on to help with, um, you know, dietary issues.
So it's, it's a whole suite of measures,
but we do know that scientifically community water
fluoridation, um, is the best way to reduce tooth decay.
Um, and particularly
as we've heard earlier also from Richard, that, um,
we get great financial benefits for less outlay.
So for the cost of about $2 60 per person a year,
that's roughly what it costs to, um, fluoridate water.
Um, and if you compare that to, for example, going
to the dentist, so most
of the savings will be accrued to fau.
Um, if you compare that with going to the dentist
and, you know, a basic filling costing 250, $300
if it's costing $2 60 per person per year, you know,
there's a great trade off there.
Do it. Just a quick supplementary that just, uh, in terms
of how, how much water are children drinking these days?
Like I grew up drinking water, you know, God's cordial
as it was called in our house, um,
Quite drunk. Sorry.
Uh, you know, is there a lot of water drunk
for in children generally as across the population?
Do you, do you have any numbers on that or an understanding
That I don't have the numbers on that.
No, I don't have that. But we do know, obviously,
that fizzy drinks and things are becoming, you know,
more commonly drunk.
And particularly when the price
of fizzy drinks sometimes is cheaper than
milk in the supermarket.
It's, it's a bit of a challenge.
But definitely milk, water is, I mean,
we're not just talking about drinking water
because fluoridation means that water that's used,
for example, to boil your peas on the stove or something,
or the water that goes into the, um, production of food,
even in, you know, uh, ultra processed food, the water
that's used has fluoride in it.
So there's fluoride going into food
and into products other than just drinking water.
Okay. And, and I like you mentioned there about fizzy
drinks, what water's free to drink, right?
Fizzy drinks aren't, and if you're saying people can afford,
I'm not saying that you are,
but people are buying fizzy drinks
and they can't afford a toothbrush for their kids
and toothpaste, and they should be reevaluating that.
Um, Dr. Perl,
Uh, great, thank you.
I note in your submission, the various reports, um,
that have been published in New Zealand on fluoridation, uh,
however, translating that in communities is always, uh,
always requires effort.
Uh, what actions are the min is
or are, what, what does the ministry do, uh, to, um,
provide communities with, uh,
information when they face decisions about flu?
Um, so, uh, we have been very active in, um, visiting, uh,
local councils, for example, who are about
to fluoridate based on the directions.
And so we've gone and we've spoken at public events, um,
around the country to both the counselors
and also the public who've been invited in to, uh, um,
explain the, the safety particularly of fluoridation
and the benefits of it.
Okay. Very good. We're, we're, we're well over. I'm sorry.
Um, we did have some glitches, so I've let it roll over,
but, but, um, we are over.
Thank you very much for coming in, presenting
to the committee today, in person, you two here,
um, and also online.
I'm sure the committee has a lot of questions and all that.
Um, apologize. Thank you. Cheers. Thank
The, uh, setting. That
was the last figures that I, I looked at.
I dunno where they are.
Um, my suspicion is that they're mostly in, uh, Auckland,
Wellington, and Christchurch.
I am aware that a number of my colleagues fly out, um, to,
um, do assessments, um,
for people who've requested assisted die.
I myself service across the whole of Theo Attacky region.
Um, and, um, so, um, uh,
but I I I,
I wonder whether people are actually making the request at
the rate that we, uh, that we would expect
once they've made the request.
If there's a significant delay in the assessment being done,
people may die during that time, so they may not be able
to take advantage of the service.
Um, and I think all these questions start
with understanding the data. Mm-hmm.
Can I just Stop on that? Yeah, that's,
We've got quick stop here. We've
got a lot of time. We're not gonna, okay.
Do you think there's any kind of cultural differences
that may explain some of the discre discrepancies
between rural and urban? I,
I, I think there is some evidence
around a rural personality, um, which, um,
and the sociological sort of papers
that I've read have suggested
because where people are living and working with animals
and they perhaps have a slightly more pragmatic, um,
attitude towards, um, uh, things like assisted dying.
Um, so you might expect them that, that, if that's true, um,
for them to actually be accessing this in a little bit more,
more than, um, people who don't have that, that experience
of shooting a sh a sh a sick cow, um, on,
on their property, for example.
You know, people take that same
attitude to their own health.
Certainly that's a conversation that I've had
with a number of, a number of people. I
Think he's dead. Right. Yeah.
Thank, thank you very much. And I'm really interested,
you've talked about, um,
data showing people potentially don't ask,
but I'm wondering if there's also a gap between asking
and being able to, um, get the correct diagnosis
that enables them to get the service.
And I'll give you a, a case in point
because I have a constituent in Belu, which is rural.
Mm. Um, who's asked me to, to, to share this
because he is trying to get assisted dying.
He meets, I think five of the seven criteria.
He's got criteria, cortical atrophy.
He says he has a terrible life. He's completely disabled.
He has not been able
to get those last two criteria completed.
And when he needs to do that, he's got to go into Dunedin.
There is only one specialist there who cannot,
in all good faith, sign those off.
Now, somebody in an urban center might have a different
experience, I imagine, and also the ability
to get more specialist, um, opinion.
Can you offer any comment on whether that kind
of data may also have an impact on
the issue that you've raised?
Uh, so within the assisted dying service,
it's the responsibility of the assisted dying providers
to make, um, the, um, to gather the information
and to make the decision about whether somebody is,
has a terminal illness that's going
to end their life in the next six months.
And to help to make that assessment of unbearable suffering
that can't be managed in a way that's acceptable, um,
to people, and that they have, um, significant, uh,
physical deterioration, um, that's irreversible.
Um, and so that sits with the assisted dying provider.
Usually the assessments that we're making, uh,
at least at the end, the first assessment is being done in
person, in the person's home.
Um, so it's, it's that access to that service for, I,
I do not doubt
that people living in rural communities have difficulty
getting access to, um,
specialist services in urban centers. I'm
Thinking about when their condition deteriorates.
Yeah. And then they get to a point
where they actually might meet the criteria,
but there's another barrier
because of their rurality in the one hour
or whatever to get to the specialist.
I, I do think that the system that you have with, um, uh,
specialists providing this level of service in the,
in the person's community is ideal for that.
I don't need to have a specialist telling me that a patient
is in the last six months of life
and has a, has a terminal illness.
I can make that determination, um, myself, I do need
to be able to gather information.
Um, but I can, um, from others, um, to make that assessment.
But it's, it
because of the way that you have things set up,
it's my responsibility of a provider to do that.
Not that, not, they don't need
to access another specialist to do that.
I would say, and one of, one of the challenges
that may come from this, if we see that rural people are,
well, we, we may find
that rural people are accessing the service more.
Um, and certainly some of the conversations I've had
with people is that they look to this service
because they can't get access to the, um,
oncology services, uh, easily that they would
otherwise want to achieve people in Gisborne, um, who have
to travel to Hamilton to have access to their, uh, um,
radiology services and say, well, that I'm,
although that will palliate my symptoms,
I just can't tolerate that travel.
Um, so radiation
Therapy, you Mean for radiation therapy?
Yeah, radiation therapy. Yeah. Yeah.
So, um, the, you know, they, they may look
to assisted dying, um, as a, as a, as a,
as a, as a service manager.
So that, that will be challenging if that is, if we,
if we see that, but that we, we have to view the service.
Mm-hmm. We have to gather the data and think about it
and how we can improve things.
Thank you very much, Dr. Scott Jones.
We're, we're at time, but thank you for coming in
and presenting to the committee
today. It's greatly appreciated.
Thank you for the opportunity.
Your does Since the field is right.
Alright. We have, um, you in here for five minutes.
Um, good to have you here.
I'll, I'll hand that time over to you shortly.
You may or may not want to leave us time for questioning,
given it's only five minutes.
There's 10 minutes on the, on the, um, thing.
Uh, the committee agreed to invite in
for a five minute hearing.
Okay. It's 10 minutes on the board
That, that may be the,
we have a five minute deliberation period afterwards,
but that would've been made clear to the petition.
Julie. Yeah. Excellent.
Okay. Thank you. All right. Over to you. Thank you.
Lisa will speak first, uh, to the gene technology, uh,
submission, and I'll just follow on from her. Thank
You. Great. Thank you.
Kick that off now. Thank you, Lisa.
Okay. You can hear me? Yes, we've got you.
Oh, that's great. Okay.
Well, thank you for reading my written submission.
In this short time, I'll, I'll just speak on the need
for a commission of inquiry.
I strongly support the establishment of a commission
of inquiry into the gene technology bill.
My position is grounded in the precautionary principle
and a clear objection to allowing biotechnology corporations
to risk contaminating New Zealand's
agriculture and environment.
The bill involves complex, ethical, environmental, cultural,
and economic issues that warrant independent
evidence-based scrutiny.
The 2001 Royal Commission recommended a proceed
with caution approach, guidance
that remains highly relevant today.
Gene technologies include advance advances like CRISPR
that have wide reaching implications in many areas
of our lives across agriculture, ecosystems, animals,
plants, microbes, food production, agriculture, ag,
agrichemicals, and medicine.
A commission of inquiry would ensure democratic oversight
prevent undue influence from industry
or narrow political interests,
and provide clear recommendations on law
and policy, particularly around the has no act.
This process is too important to be rushed.
A modern transparent inquiry would allow New Zealand
to balance scientific innovation with public values,
environmental protection, and long-term sustainability.
Given the seriousness
and scope of this issue,
an independent commission is essential
to ensure robust precautionary safeguards
that protect farmers, consumers, farmers, the environment
and future generations.
Over to Claire.
Um, to, um,
unregulated use
of GM would involve taking unacceptable risks with human
and environmental health,
and with our cultural heritage,
it would also compromise consumer choice
and our export options.
This was written in 2001 by the Royal Commission, uh,
on genetic modification.
Yet the current gene technology bill has ignored
that warning by allowing unrestricted use of GM technologies
through its exemptions.
For example, the Ministry of Business Innovation
and Employment was advised there is no scientific data from
the 20 field trials conducted in New Zealand over the last
25 years.
Yet all the trial had failures
and animal suffering were hidden.
This omission, as well as no consultation
with other impacted sector
and community bodies, shows the partiality of advice
that will be given to the regulator.
Yet these bills will allow these activities to carry on
unrestricted without regulatory oversight.
Every medical trial in this country must meet strict
oversight through the health research
council standing committee.
This bill bypasses those safeguards. I ask a question. Yes.
Public opposition has been overwhelming.
1.2 of those involved, many
of those involved in drafting the bill were in support, yet
1.4% recommended changes to the majority.
Uh, the majority, 97.1%
of submissions opposed it.
Yet these were ignored.
This has shown contempt for public consultation,
making it a mockery.
In conclusion, the gene technology bill is
fundamentally flawed.
Without regulatory oversight, there are threats
of serious irreversible damage, scientific certainty.
We now have endangered New Zealand's health economy
environment and future generations.
The gt, the gene technology bill must be halted
and a commission of inquiries
Set up. Point of order. Mr. Chair,
point of order.
If, if the submitters, uh, concluded,
Then perhaps I could just ask a, a question. So do,
Yeah. Um,
I did have one from Kim over here as well.
Oh, thank you, chair. Um, my, my question was about the,
the report that I referenced, employment workforce, um,
technology select committee from 2004 on it.
2001 one was the,
The commission. So was that, oh, sorry.
2001 Royal Royal
Royal Commission. Royal Commiss, that's right.
Royal Commiss, yes. Um, do you think
that we have learned anything, uh,
about genetic technology in the last
20 years around the world?
Which would, uh, which you could deem it
as becoming a safer option and a more proven option
At this stage?
Um, because there is so little environmental testing,
there's no human trials on any safety of any GM product
except on animals.
Um, that we cannot ask
that the technology today is any safer
than it was in the beginning.
And the concerns at the Royal Commission stage,
however, would, would,
Would people overseas consuming genetic engineered
products, uh, count this?
But that's been happening for a while now.
Um, you don't see that as a proof of safety.
Have you seen the health statistics of the countries
that are ingesting, um, their foods?
Uh, we talked about fluoride and sugar and stuff.
There is all of that, but a lot of these products
that are genetically modified
with their chemicals are actually turned into biofuels
or animal feed.
If you go round our supermarkets, you will find very little
GM products, uh, labeled
because they are not over the adventitious,
cont uh, contamination levels.
Uh, no, no, but we're over time. Let's just
Want water. Mr. Chair,
I should put her hand up
for a question really early in the piece.
That's not a point of order I'd like to hear.
Thank you though. But, um, we are over time
and I'm running this as the chair, so, um, apologies.
I know other members had questions.
Um, thank you very much, Lisa, for your, um, your petition.
Thank you very much to you two for coming in here today
and presenting to the committee. Thank you.
Thank you.